# 2020 - Week 45

Given our re-entry into lockdown, week 45 was more meeting heavy than anyone had any right to expect. But despite having faces glued to pixels and poor Robert's ears being glued to misfiring headphones, it also proved remarkably productive.

## Modelling their Lordships

On Wednesday we took a rare jaunt to our beloved palace. Anya, Donna, Ben, Silver, Robert and Michael kept a respectful distance in the House of Lords' Journal Office and set about sketching what we think we know about Lords' memberships and how they come to be. Unfortunately, Ben had forgotten to arrange a whiteboard or anything vaguely resembling a whiteboard. So we grabbed some paper and, taking great care to not get Sharpie stains on the carpet, made sketches of hereditary peers, excepted hereditary peers, life peers, Law Lords, hierarchical bishops and named bishops. We think we got to a fairly comprehensive model of seats and incumbencies and the virtues by which noble bottoms fill them. We still have some questions. Not least around Law Lords and the mechanics of inheritance. We've been taking David's peerage database as a reasonable start on the non-bishop part of this, so a missive has been dispatched and we hope to have a better understanding of how remainders and special remainders power the waterfall of privilege. Or at least how they used to.

In the short term, Robert and Michael plan to roll whatever they learn back into the database they purloined off David. In the longer term, this should all feed into any solution for modelling Lords' incumbencies and hopefully help us get a better understanding of what went wrong with orchestration into the data platform. The source model we take data from has no notion of Lords' seats or what causes a person to occupy one. So at some point some software was built to do what we nominally named "Lords' Inflation". And at some point that stopped working. Nobody being quite sure why but with a deep suspicion that it might have had something to do with ex-colleagues leaving the building. Silver and his friends at Data Language continue to investigate.

## Procedure mapping

On Thursday, Arabella got in touch asking whether it would be possible to add new steps for Commons' Select Committees opening inquiries into treaties. To date, we've only covered what happens when committees report. She also wondered whether we might perhaps add new steps for the  Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee which has just opened an inquiry into the fisheries agreement with Norway. And whether we might also add steps to cover Government responses to committee reports. So on Friday, Librarian Jayne and Michael sat down with marker pens and erasers and, with the usual diligence, once again attacked the treaty map. Which really does start to look like a spider's had a stroke. On the plus side, the Norway fisheries treaty page now shows steps and links for the opening of the EFRA enquiry and the UK / Japan treaty does the same but for the International Trade Committee. We still plan to be reactive rather than proactive when it comes to adding Commons' Select Committees and only add them as and when they choose to scrutinise treaties. Not least to save on ink. The question of how we'll find out when a committee has picked up a treaty remains unresolved. If anyone from Select Committee land is reading and has an answer to this we'd be delighted to hear from you.

This week also saw a couple of those tickets where the correct response turned out to be do nothing. The first was occasioned by the Government making a [written statement](https://questions-statements.parliament.uk/written-statements/detail/2020-10-12/HCWS499) setting out proposals for the scrutiny of the free trade agreement with Japan. We had wondered if this was something that should appear as part of the treaty procedure but, after checking with Alex and Dominique, the answer turned out to be no. Neither of our legal colleagues thinking that the statement was procedural in nature. This came as something of a relief. How one might add a statement predating laying to a procedure that starts with laying being a problem that neither librarians nor computational experts really wanted to grapple with. 

Written statements returned to the fore when the Minister for Business and Industry [used one](https://questions-statements.parliament.uk/written-statements/detail/2020-09-30/HCWS478) to let it be known that the latest 'Rona Restrictions would come into force before being laid before Parliament. We checked in with JO Jane, who stated that the statement was not procedural and should not be included. A note to add that we're already covered for querying such matters since both our [made negative](https://ukparliament.github.io/ontologies/procedure/flowcharts/sis/made-negative.pdf) and [made affirmative](https://ukparliament.github.io/ontologies/procedure/flowcharts/sis/made-affirmative.pdf) maps already include steps for Statutory Instruments coming into operation before being laid. These being required by House of Commons' public Standing Order 160 and House of Lords' public Standing Order 71. So most definitely procedural.

## Your weekly egg timer update

If you've been following along from home, you'll know that, way back in the mists of pre-lockdown times, JO Jane presented us with a Word document outlining the calculus she uses to generate anticipated scrutiny end dates for assorted types of instrument. Being nothing if not optimistic, computational expert Michael thought he'd take the document and turn it into code. Which felt at the time like a few hours work. Or a one bottle of wine problem as he likes to say.

After several months of confusion - not least about what Jane might have meant by 'bums on seats' -  many hours of staring at legislation with no formal educational in what the special words mean and a small crate of red, this week the egg timer of parliamentary scrutiny finally went 'live'. Jane did some testing and declared herself happy. And the Twitter based community of CRAG-heads also seemed content. Being gentlemen of a certain age, Robert and Michael remain convinced that working in the open does indeed make things better. And Arabella seems to agree.

That said, before the bunting went up and the corks got popped, there was still work to do. Monday morning saw Robert and Michael pouring over the [Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006 section 19](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/51/section/19#section-19), the [Public Bodies Act 2011 section 11 (12)](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2011/24/section/11#section-11-12) and the [Localism Act 2011 section 19 (14)](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2011/20/enacted#section-19-14), in the hope of finding what flavour of days they suggested should be counted. Luckily they are all in agreement with special case made affirmatives which stop counting when either House is adjourned for more than four days. Given they already had a calculation dealing with this logic, it only remained to add comments to cover new cases and the job was done.

On the subject of comments, you might know that Robert and Michael are rather proud of theirs. They've probably spent more time writing comments than they have writing code. And all their comments get written in Markdown with links to cite informing legislation. Robert has even written a parser that takes their code and makes it into more Markdown and, of course, HTML. Which means the logic behind the calculations should be understandable by anyone. Or at least anyone with an interest. Which is probably a fairly small subset of anyone. The HTML generated by the Markdown parser did have one small problem. Long lines of code were not being properly wrapped, so any error messages and suchlike were disappearing off all but the largest of screens. Luckily our Samu saw the link pop by on Twitter, clocked the problem and put in a pull request. Which fixed our line lengths nicely. Thanks Samu.

At some point in the week, Michael noticed that the treaty calculation had gone somewhat awry, invoking an odd mix of parliamentary sitting days and actual sitting days. Unless and until one or other House sits through the night and into the next day, the date returned would be quite correct. But we haven't come this far to give up on pedantry now. So the error was fixed. And with that, Robert somehow made the date input work on a tiny screen and added an egg timer favicon. The icing having gained its cherry, we pushed live.

The resulting tweets included a call for any treaty heads to check our math. Should they have time. Arabella kindly volunteered. So on Friday, we returned to Teams and talked her through the code and the comments. She did point out that - whilst the start date we ask for is the laying date, or, for period B, the date of any ministerial statement - the actual start date of scrutiny is the first joint actual sitting day *following* laying. There's not an awful lot we can do about this. Asking the user to input the scrutiny start date would require them to have knowledge of sitting days and run a calculation to get the start date before they could run our calculation to get the end date. But Robert and Michael have now updated the code to output both the scrutiny period start and end dates as well as some indication of the nature of the calculation start date. Which has made us wonder if the various clock start steps we maintain across procedural maps have been inputted correctly. Legally speaking. A question for next week.

## Glitching all the things

Young Robert continued his glitch tinkering, splitting his time between [Lords business](https://lordsbusiness.glitch.me/) tidies and further progress on [making fragments of legislation more easily citable](https://legislation.glitch.me/). If you visit [our favourite section of the Statutory Instrument Act 1946](https://legislation.glitch.me/ukpga/Geo6/9-10/36/section/7), you can now toggle between whether you want to see fragment identifiers exposed. Or not. And if you choose to have them show, you'll notice they're now accompanied by a plus button. Should you click on said button, the full path to that fragment on legislation.gov.uk will - by some process comparable to magic - be copied to your clipboard. Wow, Robert.

Not only that, our Robert has also written a bookmarklet. Just visit his legislation application, pop down to the bottom of the page and drag it to your bookmarks bar. Then, next time you're looking at something on legislation.gov.uk and think to yourself, my word, I'd like to link to that bit but I can barely be bothered looking at the HTML source, just click the bookmarklet, click that plus button and you're good to make links. And not only that, once you've copied the link you want, merely click the bookmarklet again and you'll be back in the comforting arms of TNA's finest website. Michael, for one, shall be making use of this.

## Tidying up behind ourselves

Since we first stumbled into the world of Statutory Instrument procedure, not only have our lives improved immeasurably, our appreciation of legislation.gov.uk has also improved. Also immeasurably. Over the past couple of years, we've made a lot of links. A lot of links. But some of those links were to http. And since we went live TNA have made the shift to https. Obviously, redirects are in place and nothing breaks. But it's always better to store URLs as they are and not as they were. So this week, our Jianhan updated all our links which had been to http://legislation.gov.uk to https instead. Because we are by nature librarians. And therefore tidy.

## All about the collaboration

Way back on Monday, computational experts Robert and Michael joined a meeting in which Librarian Ned talked through his work on linking organisations in Parliament's taxonomy to equivalent concepts in Wikidata. And vice versa. Some time back we started to cross-link our concepts with theirs. But not at the time of creation. Ned has been looking at how we might do the interlinking as we add new organisations and what benefits that might bring. All very fine work. They also chatted about earlier - Andrew powered - efforts to ease interlinking and how we might pick that work up. Because we are nothing if not native to a web of data.

Way back at the start of these notes - minutes ago if you're reading one hopes; what feels like months ago if you're writing them - we mentioned our trip to the House of Lords' Journal Office. Not only did we not draw on the carpets, we also took the time to have another peep around the Hanging Files. More of which we covered back in week 44. Since then we've had multiple meetings with Lords' clerks to chat about how they use the files, what works and what doesn't. We'd like to thank Luke, James and Duncan for their help. If we're yet to chat to you we basically have three questions:

* What are your information needs? What questions are you asking when entering the inner sanctum of the Hanging Files?

* What are your finding strategies? How do you approach the task and how do you choose the routes you start down?

* Having found that your finding strategy didn't work, what mental leaps do you need to make to get to a finding strategy that did? Please document your synapses. 

## Lifelong learning

Not a massive amount of formal learning this week. But at least a decent selection of our team of crack librarians did make it along to a lecture by Vanda on... Anya to write something





