# 2024 - Week 49

At some point over the last couple of weeks, your regular correspondents found themselves in the unfamiliar situtation of taking a post-work drink or two. It was one of those three-nights-in-one kinda nights where one set of friends leave and another set arrive to take their place. So pretty brutal to be honest. At one point we were joined by a couple of House of Lords colleagues, amongst them House of Lords Katya. Imagine our delight when the conversation turned to these very weeknotes and Katya announced herself to be a big fan. She expanded on her point to the table at large. "They're about really boring stuff," she explained, "but they're occasionally quite funny." Which is exactly the kind of feedback we've been looking for. If you have ideas on more boring things we could cover - preferably procedure and computer related - or a decent line in self-deprecating jokes, please don't hesitate to get in touch.

## Librarian of the Week

This week, our much coveted Librarian of the Week Trophy goes to Librarian Ayehsa. Not for her information management skills - which are, of course, excellent - but instead for her unstinting efforts to inject a little organisation into proceedings. Not an easy task, akin to herding kittens perhaps. Some context may be required. Let's try to inject some.

A wee while back - wee while being Librarian Anya's usual shorthand for "we can't remember when" - our crack team of librarians packed up their pens, pencils and thimblettes, leaving Tothill Street for pastures new. The new pastures being a new office - or 'co-working and ideation space' as Young Robert might say - a couple of hundred yards closer to the Two Chairmen. Clearly a factor taken into consideration by the facilities team. Now our current accommodation is a huge improvement on what we had, the views from our roof terrace being to die for. We're certainly not ones to complain, but the interior decor has that post-industrial pastiche vibe popular in Mancunian cafe bars around the turn of the century. Much exposed brickwork and equally exposed air-conditoning units if you get our drift.

Much like yer man Morrissey took on the Haçienda's somewhat harsh industrial design by turning up with a bunch of gladdies, our crack team of librarians decided the place needed softening a little. Budgets being far from unlimited, they decided to go with a bunting and balloon look. And very jolly it was too.

Unfortunately, your modern balloon does not have the staying power of the ones from childhood memory. Slow deflation turned into withering and eventually perishing, some of our poor balloons taking on the appearance of abandoned prophylactics. Pretty depressing. This is where Librarian Ayesha stepped in. She did the research, chose the materials, organised the whip round and placed the order. This time, we've gone with a mix of better quality balloons and a multi-coloured assortment of pom-poms.

As Librarians Anya, Jayne and Phil, together with computational lap-dog Michael, hobnobbed - for which read wallflowered - with the great and good at the Study of Parliament Group's birthday party - more of which later - Ayesha set about organising the decoration party. She struck lucky, the timing coinciding with Librarian Anna being in the office. Perhaps the only one of us that can actually reach the ceiling. Data Analyst Rachel was also on hand, presumably making a pompom deployment graph or some such.

Not only this, Librarian Ayesha has also been on hand to organise our Christmas dinner outing. For those interested, a starter of cheese, followed by a main course of cheese, with some cheese to finish. We'd all like to thank Ayesha for making our office look splendid and helping to fill our bellies. Thanks Ayesha. Well deserving of LotW.

## I am a procedural cartographer - to [the tune of the Palace Brothers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=owvF3Vb0JhA&ab_channel=tomkat69pc)

It's been a wee while since we last stuck our teeth into a serious bit of procedural cartography, though our crack team of librarians remain on duty and our procedure maps continue to flex as Parliament flexes. This week saw the addition of two new steps - and accompanying logic - to our treaty procedure map. The first change came at the behest of the International Agreements Committee and led to a new step describing a request for an extension to scrutiny period A for the UK-Mauritius agreement concerning the Chagos Archipelago. The second new step describes correspondence being published by the Justice Committee and has seen its first appearance on the Agreement, done at London on 14 June 2023, between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Swiss Confederation on Recognition of Professional Qualifications. Occasionally, one has to step back and admire the shere length of treaty titles.

Elsewhere in procedure tracking news, the National Audit Office got in touch to ask if our beloved egg timer is updated and indeed supported. It appears they'd like to use the recess dates section to support some of their internal reporting. Unexpected use cases are always nice, confirming our suspicion that user needs are emergent from usage. Librarian Jayne was delighted to confirm that the beloved egg timer is indeed both supported and regularly updated. Indeed, it is fair to say, it will be better supported once Shedcode James lends a more professional hand.

Other procedure tracking news has been less good, a single meeting about whether two lines on a diagram should actually be a crow's foot unexpectedly exploding into a whole series of other meetings and a whole bunch of work. Librarian Anya got dragged in. Librarian Ned got dragged in. Librarian Silver got dragged in. A conclusion was finally reached and the decision taken that what we had been calling an event was in fact a business item, an event wrapping one or more business items and a business item only ever belonging in one work package. At this point, one has to admit, House of Lords Katya definitely has a point. That said, we can only work with the material we're given, and the combination of parliamentary procedure and the semantic web is a pretty tough gig.

The upshot is, Silver has been placed on standby, our efforts to port procedure editor to data graphs have been put on the back burner and we're once again back to editing our procedure-related models before progress can continue. Sometimes, one has to slow down to speed up. Is our excuse.

The other upshot of the "one line or a crow's foot" debate was an almost complete rewrite of our still gestating browsable procedure space. Rewrite aside, progress continues to be made, Librarian Jayne and Michael finding the time to fill out most of the views nested under /procedures. Lovely.

In better news, Librarian Jayne has identified a number of measures to mitigate the feared collapse of our existing procedure editor and our Jianhan has taken time out of his busy schedule to implement them. No data being lost in the process. Excellent work, as ever.

## New, old search

Elsewhere, progress on our parliamentary search application continues to be made, this week seeing the improbably named European material produced by EU institutions reach the happy pile. Type labels for all content types are now also considered sorted. Except for Commons and Lords library briefings where a decision has been taken to prefer categories over subtypes. Your correspondent knows not why, but it's best not to question. A new fallback template has also been introduced to mop up the odd occasion on which content arrives lacking any and all type information. This is not a thing that should happen, but, computers being computers, it's not unknown. Early day motion object page design has also been tidied, the introductory sentence now only listing the primary sponsor / tabling member, all other sponsors being present in the more details box.

Developer Jon has also been busy adding Claw functionality to our search result pages. The Claw being a bit of Javascript used by our crack team of librarians named after the shape your hand is forced to make in order to trigger it. Control + Option + D - at least if you're on a Apple machine - for those interested. If your hand is able to make such a shape, it decorates the search result items with additional links and information necessary for the performance of excellent librarianship.

It would be remiss of your correspondent to skip over over his own comments in a meeting with Librarian Jayne and Developer Jon, during which Michael may have suggested Jayne's use of a Trello card could verge on the short novella. Actually, said Jon, they are the best, most descriptive cards I have ever had the pleasure of working with. Jayne may have blushed a little. Michael blushed more.

All of Jon's efforts would prove pointless but for the excellent information management displayed by our crack team of librarians. After all, you can't use code to fix data. To that end, our librarians have been busy fixing a few longstanding issues. One such issue was the absence of made dates on made statutory instruments. This because our old system had no field for capturing such information, the only available option being yet another note in the notes field. Undeterred Librarian Emma has trawled through four decades worth of SIs and [decanted any made dates from the notes field into the made date field](https://trello.com/c/CgF863X6/312-sis-with-si-numbers-but-no-made-dates). A proper labour of love and one we hope our dearer reader appreciates.

Changes have also been made to our taxonomic hierarchy, the unhelpfully named 'Unprinted Papers' finding themselves [renamed to the slightly more descriptive 'Unnumbered Act Papers'](https://trello.com/c/zuUjoaRz/285-unprinted-papers-oral-evidence-and-written-evidence). A similar change over in committee land sees what were 'Committee proceedings' [renamed to the more specific - and indeed accurate - 'General committee proceedings'](https://trello.com/c/Sntlq6QG/283-parliamentary-committees-typeses352156-hierarchy-and-labelling).

The final couple of changes saw the useful separation of proposals to do something and actually doing something. First up being a new term covering proposals for a Regulatory Reform Order, which Librarian Ned noticed had been munged together with actual Regulatory Reform Orders. This is [now fixed](https://trello.com/c/xVZrGfQJ/335-regulatory-reform-order-proposal). A similar effort has been made for orders made under the Deregulation and Contracting Out Act 1994 and proposals for such orders, which have also had new digital shelves made, [proposals and orders now being shelved correctly](https://trello.com/c/HdRHKaHB/336-deregulation-orders-and-their-proposals).

## Psephologising wildly

Glancing at Trello, very little appears to have changed over in psephological land. That said, a number of meetings have been convened, mostly on the subject of what we'd like to do and what we actually have the capacity to do. The gap appearing quite wide at this stage. That said, one change we'll all welcome has been made by Shedcode James, who's been beavering away automating our election results database to Datasette pipeline. This has always been a somewhat manual process, In order to get from the Postgres database hosted on Heroku, you first need to download the thing, then convert it to MySQLite, then upload it again. A process made more difficult by Michael's machine flat out refusing to deal with Python, leaving Young Robert to pick up the slack. Via the judicious application of a GitHiub action or two, James has now fully automated this process, freeing up Young Robert to be what managerial types - and indeed Robert himself - might describe as 'more creative'. Let's see how that goes.

## A Rush and a push

James has also been busy helping Librarian Anna to normalise the Rush data she's been so diligently tidying. In the hope it never gets into the same mess again. This week saw the unveiling of yet another normalised database table, this one describing the [nature of an election](https://membersafter1832.historyofparliamentonline.org/nature_of_elections) and seeing use across both successful and unsuccessful candidacies. Lovely.

## Managing Members

Tracking changes in Cabinet members has never been too difficult a job. After all, they do tend to make the news. They are also published in a timely fashion on gov.uk, though - if we're allowed to make requests - not compounding two different job titles into one string would make all the difference here. Tracking changes to the Shadow Cabinet has always been a trickier proposition, there being no real official source of such announcements. This week, Librarian Phil reports he has made contact with the Conservative party, who have [promised to keep us informed of any and all changes on an ongoing basis](https://trello.com/c/xo0cwith/430-shadow-cabinet-reshuffle-2024-11). Going forward, as Young Robert might add. So that's another job now made much easier.

A member-related editorial decision has also been made over in Parliamentary Facts and Figures-land. Where possible, we always try to impregnate our spreadsheets with useful identifiers, many of which are sourced from our Members' Names Information System. This is all fine and dandy for more modern members, but, back before 1980, MNIS is patchy at best. To cope with that problem, we had been using identifiers from the Rush database. It has now been decided to prefer Wikidata identifiers over Rush, the former providing a point of triangulation back to Rush and beyond. All eased - indeed made possible - by Librarian Andrew's excellent efforts in this area. Thanks Andrew.

## Mitigating Mastodon moves

If you tuned in last time out, you'll know that the imminent closure of botsinspace left us in a mild state of panic about the future of our Mastodon bot accounts. Luckily, James offered to lend mastodon.me.uk for lifeboat purposes. Thanks to the sterling efforts of Librarian Anna and our Jianhan, all bot accounts have now been migrated, their followers being migrated with them. Splendid work all round.

In other bot news, Shedcode James has also stepped in, making a number of improvements to the code base our written answer / statement bots run on. [Ruby dependencies have been updated](https://trello.com/c/QEfNYkd2/53-update-ruby-dependencies) and unused tests and helpers removed to [speed up application load](https://trello.com/c/i7bstXvL/45-remove-unused-test-files-and-helpers-to-speed-application-load). Thanks James.

## Outreach and engagement

Thursday and Friday of week 49 saw Librarians Anya, Jayne and Phil, together with wannabe librarian Michael, take a trip into town to celebrate the 60th birthday of the Study of Parliament Group. A splendid time being had by all. The conference peaked on the Friday with a particularly thought provoking session on how one might choose to rebuild Parliament should the old palace ever burn down. Once again, a drink was taken. A cheery wave to Mssrs Wood, Korris, Evans and Childs. See you again on the other side?


