# 2021 - Week 1

## Here we go again

It really never ends does it? As Christmas faded into New Year and New Year faded into more days watching water drip down windows, our cast of crack librarians and computational experts pulled back curtains, took out bottles, emptied ashtrays, polished off the last of the breakfast mince pies and returned to work. It may take us a little while to get back up to speed. Parties lasting longer than a weekend would take their toll on the best of us.

## Logicifying the procedure model

When we last corresponded, dear reader, we were deep in the weeds of remodelling our procedure model and deep in debate about whether a classically logical approach was more appropriate to our needs than a turn toward the ternary. To be perfectly honest, we forgot most of the details, so anybody else taking an interest is possibly a stretch too far.

We do remember that librarians Anya and Jayne and computational experts young Robert and Michael did [put heads together](https://trello.com/c/rriSC6rW/300-do-we-need-to-move-to-3-characters-for-labelling-decision-and-logic-steps) and decide that our idea of overloading step labels with type information was in fact a bad idea. Which meant poor Jianhan spent the week before Christmas [rewriting the procedure editor output](https://trello.com/c/BL42O19y/47-surface-step-type-label-on-all-listings-of-steps-in-procedure-editor), [rewriting the procedure editor inputs](https://trello.com/c/KV9cYzUE/48-surface-step-type-when-creating-updating-a-route), [rewriting the procedure visualisation](https://trello.com/c/PqHfSZXv/49-surface-step-type-label-in-procedure-visualisation) and [rewriting the logic step checker email](https://trello.com/c/H4ahiA6k/50-surface-step-type-label-in-input-output-checker-emails). Apologies Jianhan. Occasionally it is only possible to get things right by getting them wrong first. He also managed to stuff his large Santa sack with stocking fillers, [deploying the step checker email](https://trello.com/c/rsQ4Vv2b/42-validate-the-number-of-inputs-and-outputs-to-steps) and [tidying up outstanding work on the procedure visualisation](https://trello.com/c/KKxTlrFj/25-rewrite-procedure-visualisation). Top work Jianhan.

Jayne and Michael scurried to keep up with Jianhan's welcome but unexpected productivity burst, devoting several hours to [checking the hand drawn proposed negative statutory instrument map matched that drawn by the machines](https://trello.com/c/fSPhdp63/54-recheck-pnsi-omnigraffle-viz), [retesting the logic step checker mail with every combination of broke they could think of](https://trello.com/c/LLu3XPHL/52-restest-input-output-checker-emails) and [renumbering the PNSI map to match our new pattern](https://trello.com/c/PgEQ4C4g/51-renumber-pnsi-steps).

Since our return to work, Jianhan has been distracted by more immediate concerns, of which more later. But, should we ever be lucky enough to get more of his time, we hope to persuade him to take what's he's done with logicifying the procedure visualisation and do [the same for our work package visualisations](https://trello.com/c/CSr8KMvp/26-rewrite-work-package-visualisation). The switch from a route type approach to a step type approach introduces further complications and we've not yet thought of a way in which business steps sitting outside the cone of future possibility can be excluded from the pictures the machine draws. So what results might be more verbose, but we're happy to trade verbosity for accuracy. That said, it's important we get these right.

Whereas the procedure visualisations are great for showing off, they don't have much impact on our day to day work. Work package visualisations on the other hand, are used every day by our team of crack librarians to check that procedure is proceeding as expected. Sometimes we spot new combinations that don't match mapped patterns. Which forces us back, crayons in hand, to the procedure maps. And sometimes we spot places where procedure hasn't been followed in a way that it should have been and have to report back to assorted offices for patch over purposes. We already have the PNSI procedure re-mapped to a logical model, but the PNSI procedure is really not much of a procedure. In order to test properly, we need to compare against something a little larger. Treaty procedure under the [Constitutional Reform and Governance Act 2010](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/25/part/2) is the most complicated procedure we've mapped to date, but when you're still in the midst of mince pie and baileys indigestion, it's not really a thing one can face. So Jayne and Michael have decided to [start with the slightly more sensible made negative statutory instrument procedure](https://trello.com/c/XodNqLKV/15-remap-made-negative). So far they've managed to polish of the Commons half of the Venn and the results are so beautiful they brought Michael close to tears. Do please make a click. But be sure to have a handkerchief close to hand.

## Procedure mapping

In the absense of both clerks and Parliament, we haven't had much to do in terms of keeping our maps congruent with procedural reality. Jayne did check in with [Eleanor](https://twitter.com/ellie_hourigan) who confirmed that the [Joint Committee on Human Rights](https://committees.parliament.uk/committee/93/human-rights-joint-committee) would [only ever open a single inquiry into a treaty](https://trello.com/c/orAuOIiQ/328-eh-ah-are-jchr-steps-correct-in-treaty-procedure). At least during the CRAG scrutiny period. Meaning the map we'd drawn was already quite correct. Which was nice.

## Your weekly egg timer update

In the weeks preceding Christmas, we thought we'd finally cracked the egg-timer. All the dates returned matched those calculated by JO Jane's trusty abacus. On the Monday following Christmas there was a slight kerfuffle when Librarian Jayne reported the dates were incorrect for PNSIs and made affirmatives. Michael began to rip the code apart and cry into his coffee. Sobs could still be heard over Teams when Jayne declared that the egg timer was quite correct in its calculations. A root cause analysis team was quickly convened which revealed that Jayne had forgotten how everything works. Which only goes to prove that even librarians can only party so hard.

## Linking open data - as we used to say

The first Tuesday back saw young Robert and Michael join a meeting with librarians Anya, Liz and Ned to talk through our approach to linking Wikidata entities to concepts in our thesauri. Anya, Robert and Ned had spent the parts of Christmas when they weren't partying using the Mix 'n' Match tool to confirm and reject more of what the machines had declared to be equivalent. Anya has started to put a document together which she hopes will turn into a manual for matching. Our librarians do love a good manual. If you're a Wikidatian and have reckons, please do get in touch.

## All about the collaboration

For those with an interest in querying for SI and treaty related data, Jayne has spent some weeks beavering away [adding comments](https://trello.com/c/BFYSMqLf/150-add-comments-to-sparql-library) to our sparkling SPARQL library. This was occasioned by Tony complaining that queries built around obfuscated identifiers were a little difficult to follow and adapt. In the week before Christmas, Jayne pushed a new version of our treaty query page live. This time with comments. Or explanatory notes, as we like to say. We hope Tony is well and happy with our work.

Jayne has been in regular communication with our colleagues in Software Engineering as they attend to a snag list of bugs on the SI and treaty tracking websites. One such bug was with the [Education (Exemption from School and Further Education Institutions Inspections) (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2020](https://statutoryinstruments.parliament.uk/timeline/8RmlAaoE/SI-2020/) which were appearing not once but twice on the website. It turned out the Lords' laying was missing an associated laying department. This is [now fixed](https://trello.com/c/mpnPIlQ4/310-cherwell-call-1299381-duplicate-si-on-website), as is the website. Well done Jayne.

On the night before Christmas, a request came in from another academic for a dump of the Rush data which Michael attempted to comply with. But his version of Postgres appears to be incompatible with the rest of the internet and the rest of his computer. So young Robert stepped in and the data was dispatched. If anyone can help Michael upgrade his Postgres, he's be delighted to hear from them.

