# 2020 - Week 18

So, then, another week down. Or at least we think it is. With the steady drip of time interrupted only by the bits when you're sober, the bits when you're drunk and the bits when you're asleep, it's somewhat difficult to tell. Nevertheless, we have pressed on. If only because losing focus risks an afternoon nap, which has the potential to rip a major hole in the space-time continuum. 

Little in the way of procedure modelling and mapping progress has been made this week, mostly because our team of crack librarians have been scratching their heads about how to index the flurry of new procedures emerging from our half virtual Parliament. Hansard now comes with with a V alongside any Member being present virtually but no actual structured data. So the librarians to-ed and then fro-ed between indexing for those physically present - which would have been less work but not historically compatible - or indexing for those dialling in. Eventually they settled on flagging virtual contributions. So manuals have been updated and new ways of working established.

They also found themselves faced with a new type of question in the House of Lords, who've now introduced topical questions. Which is obviously not the same use of the word topical as in the House of Commons. Topical questions in the Commons are those with no substantive content, tabled only for the benefit of the follow up. Topical questions in the Lords are substantive and seem to be more like named day questions in the Commons. Although the date for answer flowing through the system does not indicate this. We do sometimes wonder, with an entire dictionary at our disposal, why we can't occasionally choose new words for new types of things. But short of buying a thesaurus, we are where we are. We can confidently state that changes to the question and answer model should be along shortly.

There's also been little progress on the procedure map changes sketched out over the last few weeks. Mostly because clerkly feedback is required and clerks are understandably busy. There was an email from Paul, answering a rather niche question about how scrutiny periods are calculated when one House sits over two days and the other does not. But as ever with Paul's emails, it will take four people at least a couple of hours to parse them. We're not being rude Paul, we're just not that bright.

In the absence of librarians, Robert and Michael occupied themselves with some prototyping of a scrutiny period calculator. As has been repeated ad nauseam, five of the six procedures we support have scrutiny period clocks. And different procedures count days differently, day counts can differ per work package and the Houses might sit on different days. So knowing that something was laid - or occasionally made - and that kicked off a clock and the clock counts these type of days and the Houses sat then and these many days are set out in statute, requires a great many fingers to calculate when the egg timer of scrutiny runs dry of sand. Currently these fingers are attached to Journal Office Jane who compiles and distributes a Word table of start and end date mappings. Any change in sitting days requires a recalculation and the results are currently entered into both the Statutory Instrument and treaty tracker data by hand. This amounts to quite a lot of quite tedious work. Now we are not by nature, uncritical of computers. They have a tendency to whine and grumble for reasons we find difficult to understand. But when it comes to looping through something and incrementing a count there are few tools better suited. There's been a long-term goal to capture the logic that underpins these calculations and put that inside in a computer. And luckily Jane has recently mailed Librarian Jayne with a full and frank explanation of the maths required. But we still lack a reliable source sitting days and adjournments and prorogation and dissolution periods. So Monday kicked off with a Skype call between Jayne, Robert and Michael. Or possibly a Teams call. Or Zoom. One of those. With their newly discovered screen sharing capabilities, they managed to make a first pass at a domain model which rapidly turned into a database schema. Robert and Michael then busied themselves by polishing up their rather dusty Ruby skills and turning the pixel porttrait into a database of parliament periods, dissolution periods, sessions, prorogation periods, sitting days, adjournment days and etc. They've imported the parliament period spreadsheet Librarian Ned assembled from back issues of the London Gazette. And Jayne has started on a second spreadsheet of sessions. They've also created a set of public Google calendars into which they intend to add sitting and non-sitting days for both Houses. With only very mild swearing, a lot of Googling and much hitting of things with their computational spanners, they finally managed to pull sitting and non-sitting days out of the Google calendar and slurp them into their database. If things go to plan next week, they'll hopefully get some accurate sitting day data and set about building a new version of the egg timer. But this time with code, not fingers.

Elsewhere, comment editing continued as comment editing always does. Robert and Michael have chiselled away at the formal body model in the hope of extracting a diamond from the dust. A new version is now published so if anyone reading has a passing interest in committees, please do take a look and let them know what they've got wrong this time. We're possibly looking at you here, Paul.

Anya and Michael also fired up Zoom to attend a Study of Parliament Group seminar on how different legislatures are adapting technically and procedurally to the plague. It was lovely at least to see the Cristina and Martyn's faces. Though hopefully at some point that will be back in a pub.

Yet more telephony happened on Wednesday with Librarians Anya and Liz and computational expert Michael chatting to more expert computational expert James about planned changes to the History of Parliament Trust application hosting the Rush data. Plans were made and work started to get ticked off. Michael has also shared the Rush data with a research group in Durham. Always nice to have interesting data available to be shared.

Late breaking Friday saw an email from Tom of the ParlRules project. They've just published a new version of their House of Commons public Standing Order data, this time organised around whole Standing Orders, rather than the more disaggregated level of sub-articles. Which should make Robert and Michael's life much easier. They intend to grab the data next week and wrap it into the website they cobbled together out of the old data. Unless their egg timer project overruns anyway.







