# 2020 - Week 48

## Modelling their Lordships

Our regular reader will by now surely know that our source system for Member data is good for telling us who was in the House of Lords and who is in the House of Lords. It even tells us which type of seat each bottom occupied or occupies. But it's not so good on question of why. Or as our colleagues in the Lords might say, the virtues by which noble bottoms meet benches. Our House membership model has the concept of a house seat: a place reserved for a Member by virtue of their being elected, inheriting a seat, being made a life peer, being a Law Lord, being a high up in the Church of England hierarchy or being one of four named bishops. Because the Members' Names Information System has both House membership and constituency representations - via elections - it's possible to collapse the two arms into data describing an MP as incumbent in a seat aligned to a constituency. For the Lords, we're not so lucky. Which meant that when the data platform work kicked off we needed to find a way to "inflate" House membership data into incumbencies in seats. And the only route available was a set of Sharepoint tables.

This week Julian and Silver from Data Language handed in their homework. They were tasked with investigating why the orchestration of Member data from MNIS to the platfrom failed at some point prior to the last General Election. It now appears that the Sharepoint tables were at some point migrated and the code was updated to reflect that. But as the location changed so did the permissions. And the code was not updated to cope with that. So every time the code runs and asks of the tables, "where should I place this bottom" all it gets for its troubles is a 401. Whether this be solved by resurrecting the workaround and updating the code to have the right permissions, or solved in a more long term fashion remains a question for elders and betters.

## Logicifying the procedure model

It was a big week this week. Proper big week. Librarians Anya and Jayne and computational experts Robert and Michael put the finishing touches to their first ever logic gate based procedural model: everybody's favourite Proposed Negative Statutory Instrument. The PNSI is a slightly odd side effect of the [European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2018/16/contents/enacted) which we all thought we'd seen the back of. But still they arrive. The team have to admit they're rather pleased with it. And also rather enjoyed the puzzle of drawing it. But they are somewhat starved for entertainment at the moment.

Robert, meanwhile, has been spending a part of what constitutes leisure time in these desperate days trying to wrap his head around how we might express said logic in Prolog. A task made slightly harder by the fact that he's never written Prolog before. And harder still because... well Prolog. Nevertheless, he could not plough on without reading. And read he did. Last week he announced to an astonished audience that we'd taken a step out of binary and into ternary logic. This week his reading caused him to question this. Or walk it back as political journalists like to say. Ternary logic, he explained was really more about how one deals with incorrect values and error states. But none of our values are incorrect and none of our states are errors. This week he declared we were back in the world of classical logic though still dealing with a NULL state on routes. We do with he'd make his mind up.

Robert and Michael took Robert's new found learnings and [applied them](https://trello.com/c/Fz25LzeA/293-rewrite-procedure-model-logic-gate-comments) to our beloved procedure model which they decorated with what we think is our longest comment yet. Whilst they were in there they also removed some of the subclassing to bring the whole thing more in line with what we actually intend to implement.

Whilst they had their tiny commenting chisels sharpened they also took a look at our procedural design notes and, with surgeon-like precision, dedicated a good hour to shaving off thirty words or so. Maybe forty. There is still work to do to explain our current understanding of our logic gate implementation. Not least to ourselves. But we do now have a truth table. Like professionals. The eagle-eyed might notice they do not quite match those of [Kleene and Priest](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-valued_logic#Kleene_and_Priest_logics). But that, we have decided, does not matter. Those lads were all about the ternary. And we are classicists. Again. Until next week.

As if our PNSI cake were not complete, Librarian Jayne popped some sprinkles over the top and stuck a cherry on the icing with the addition of blobs to capture citations to legislation and Standing Orders. The switch from our route type model to our logic gate model makes the question of which bits should do the citing rather more difficult. And we probably need to sit down at some point and draw up some rules. But at least the Standing Order part was easy. Given there are no Standing Orders applicable to PNSIs.

## Orders being standing

On the subject of Standing Orders, Michael has continued to plug away with processing the new data from our friends in Oxford. Fragment versions are now linked to fragments, order versions and orders. And order versions are linked to orders. Making the model if not virtuous and least cyclical. We're still less than happy with the naming of things but nobody ever said naming things was easy. 

Last week we got confirmation from Messrs. Beamish, Evans and Korris that a revision to a Standing Order which only changed the case could - in their recollection - never be considered substantive. And their recollection is quite good enough for us. So this week Michael has been running scripts over the text and recording when edits happened and whether they were proper revisions or just some letters changing case. We would usually provide a link here but our Heroku account is still lacking tokens and our website has entered suspended animation until the start of next month. Not that we would ever hold out a begging bowl. We still have some pride.

## Your weekly egg timer update

At some point last week, Librarian Jayne kindly offered to read through Robert and Michael's code comments. At some point this week [she did so](https://trello.com/c/8a35yF4L/298-egg-timer-corrections-to-all-si-calculations). No problems were found with the code but she did diagnose some confusion in their middle aged heads between drafts and negatives and mades and affirmatives because the legislation they'd pointed to as informing made affirmatives did no such thing. Try as he might, Michael does not think he'll ever make his brain remember the differences between these four things.

Jayne reported back on Friday morning and Jayne, Robert and Michael were due to talk JO Jane through the comments late Friday afternoon. So the scrabbled together an hour out of their busy schedules and once more met in pixels. Comments being corrected, they turned their attentions to putting the user guide the Ja(y)nes had written into bullet points and popped it online. Though it still needs linking to from the homepage. Robert.

Later that day they met with Jane, chatted through three lots of Statutory Instrument calculation comments and one lot for PNSIs. No [errors, mistakes or blunders]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cQ1ySyAqWVU)  were found, although by the time they packed up their pencil cases it was 5pm. So quite understandably their priorities had taken a turn toward another fun packed weekend of wet walks and weeknotes.