# 2020 - Week 20

We think we've had a more successful week than many in the recent past. At least as far as we can remember. It is, as ever, quite difficult to tell where one week ends and another begins these days. But we have at least not let plaque-based isolation impact on our education. Wednesday morning kicked off early for Anya and Michael, with a Study of Parliament Group seminar on the impacts of Coronavirus on gender in legislatures. Which ended up much more wide ranging than first expected. Thanks as ever Cristina and team. Lovely to see and hear from familiar faces. Education continued on Friday, when Anya snuck Librarian Jayne and self-titled computational expert Michael into one of her Procedure Level 2 courses. This time round fronted by the marvellous Mr Evans, delivering a talk on Parliament and time. Paul was supported by what had to count as the finest lockdown bookshelf yet seen. Unless he's somehow figured out the video conference background trick. Plans to get Paul, David and Martyn on a call, if only to place bets on their bookshelves have been muttered. Unsurprisingly, Paul was his usual charming and garrulous self. Audience consideration extending to an offer of a fag break for Anya and Michael, should things overrun. Thanks Paul. Too often the education sector lacks focus on us smokers.

As ever, we continued in our efforts to balance theory and practice and, whilst steering well clear of shouts of PRAXIS, Michael ploughed on with [his own efforts around Parliament and time](https://trello.com/c/4696EfyX/112-prototype-a-calendar). This week, ably enabled by Librarian Jayshree. Anyone who's been following along from home will by now surely know that Michael has been concentrating recent efforts on building a prototype egg-timer for parliamentary procedure. Having typed the same explanation for the past few weeks, we can only refer you to weeknotes passim. Anyroad, he's now added a calculator which at least attempts to return an anticipated end date for Statutory Instruments subject to parliamentary scrutiny for 40 days. Or any other number of days you may wish to choose. Biblical or otherwise. Though, in the first instance, and to save on fingers, right now it deals with instruments laid before the House of Commons only. Bicameral proceedings to follow next week. Allotment time permitting. We're fairly sure this is working as intended. But it does need considerably more testing. Unlike last week, the calculations are now based on actual sitting dates. Rather than just random nonsense for testing purposes. All thanks to Jayshree, who's been manically adding sitting and non-sitting days to our Google calendars. These are now populated up to and including Sunday, 14th June. We hope to continue into the future and backwards into the past to help us better test. And better anticipate. If everything goes to plan we hope to have more egg timers for more procedures next week. Though Michael and Robert also rather fancy completely rewriting what they've done to date, because the calendar date handling is, quite frankly, shonky. So it's more than possible that next week's steps will be backwards.

Back in the world of procedure mapping, Librarian Jayne and Michael started and so very nearly completed their first attempt at the [Census SI procedure](https://trello.com/c/RQYwEsDy/102-census-si-map). This is something of a beast, being part negative and part affirmative, with the less than welcome presence of amendabilty. Though this via amendments to the affirmative approval motion rather than bill style amendments. So that, at least, is something. Michael had been under the impression that the negative and affirmative elements ran in series, though Jayne informed him that this time around, the affirmative approval motions were tabled whilst the negative elements were still proceeding through Parliament. So, via the medium of shared screens, they took the draft negative map and slapped the draft affirmative model alongside. This is what they belive men in the motor trade refer to as a cut and shut job. And probably about as reliable. The resulting map is largely complete. To the best of their knowledge anyway. But still lacks motion amendability in the Lords. What happens then and how they prove anything is anyone's guess.

The rest of Jayne and Michael's week was spent playing their own version of ping-pong with Journal Office Jane. Emails rocketed over nets as JO Jane deployed her trademarked half volleys and drop shots. With their usual grunts and groans, Jayne and Michael bounced around the court picking up chalk marks on plimsoles and faces. Jane did declare herself happy with [their efforts on made affirmatives](https://trello.com/c/qjfr3R0z/98-made-affirmatives-under-the-sanctions-act) laid under the [Sanctions and Anti-Money Laundering Act 2018](http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2018/13/contents/enacted) but pointed out we'd be better talking to an FCO lawyer on this. Within minutes, she had hooked us up with such a person. Feedback is eagerly awaited.

Further rallies ensued, the tiebreak taking place over Skype messages, with no one really sure who won. Nevertheless, they did seem to reach some sort of conclusion on both the depositing of papers before the [laying of SIs introducing criminal offences under the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018](https://trello.com/c/MdQvaYMW/22-deposited-papers-ahead-of-laying-sis-introducing-criminal-offences) and the long contentious matter of [SI revocation](https://trello.com/c/KWbc8Etq/75-revoked-sis-committee-consideration). Should everything go to plan, which seems unlikely, next week should see the decantation out of playpen pictures and into proper procedure maps and data. Stay tuned. Important messages from our sponsors. Etc.

In tiny chisel news, Robert and Michael continued on their quest to sculpt ontology comments out of pure consonants and vowels. And hyphens. Lots of hyphens. This week saw them turn their attention to the house membership model, a new version of which is now made available for constructive criticism and tyre kicking. Although it still remains to add to interface classes. Another job for next week.