# 2020 - Week 13

The week began, not unexpectedly, with a phone call. Librarian Jayne and [Michael](https://twitter.com/fantasticlife) took to Omnigraffle and the procedure editor to make some changes to the [Proposed Negative Statutory Instrument procedure map](https://ukparliament.github.io/ontologies/procedure/flowcharts/proposed-negative-sis/proposed-negative-sis.pdf). Michael had been under the impression that PNSIs preceding an Statutory Instrument that would only be laid before the House of Commons, would themselves only be laid in that House. So he'd designed the PNSI map to say Commons layings were caused but Lords layings were only allowed. It turned out this impression was quite wrong and Journal Office Jayne did not shy from the fact that Michael had made a mistake here. Jayne and Michael have now [fixed both maps and data](https://trello.com/c/3eUXQWIh/84-pnsis-can-only-be-laid-in-both-houses-commons-only-not-possible). It can't be denied that editing this stuff is usually made easier when we have a bit of carpet to lie on and the same screen to look at. But phone chats are working better than expected so far. Even if it does occasionally descend into, "Move the red one. THE RED ONE. NOT THAT WAY. IDIOT!"

On the same call, Jayne and Michael also [took a look at some of the non-self-precluding steps](https://trello.com/c/dK3qJKfV/83-non-self-precluding-steps) across all procedures and scratched their heads at why they'd ever made them this way. After some consideration they decided to leave clock start steps as non-self-precluding. Because, very occasionally, an instrument is accidentally laid into one House when it should have been laid into both. And then gets laid into the second House the next day. Which causes the clock to reset to zero. Which feels like interesting information to capture.

Our SI procedures on the other hand had non-self-precluding steps for approvals of fatal motions / prayers. But fatality being accepted doesn't really present an opportunity for it to be accepted again. So Jayne and Michael have now added self-preclusion routes on the 'Motion to stop the instrument being law approved' step in the [made negative procedure](https://ukparliament.github.io/ontologies/procedure/flowcharts/sis/made-negative.pdf) and the 'Motion (prayer) to stop the instrument becoming law approved' steps in the [draft](https://ukparliament.github.io/ontologies/procedure/flowcharts/sis/draft-affirmative.pdf) and [made affirmative](https://ukparliament.github.io/ontologies/procedure/flowcharts/sis/made-affirmative.pdf) procedures.

Back in [week 9](https://ukparliament.github.io/ontologies/meta/weeknotes/2020/09/), [Silver](https://twitter.com/silveroliver) and Michael sat down with the librarians of the Indexing and Data Management Section and attempted to plot a [Wardley map](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wardley_map) of their activities. It soon became apparent that whilst they had policy documents for taxonomy management and indexing principles, when it came to procedure mapping they were pretty much making up as they went along. [Anya](https://twitter.com/bitten_) was not pleased about this. Not pleased at all. So, on Monday afternoon, Robert and Michael made a first stab at drafting some procedure mapping guidelines. The thing you find when you're working in pure pixels is that when you reach the end of your allotted meeting slot, you don't just rush to make some decisions and walk out. You book another hour the next day and keep going. So they kept going with occasional help from Jayne. It's now Wednesday and they're three hours in and still going.

On Tuesday Jayne and Michael had a call to relook at preclusion rules around the reporting outcomes of the [Secondary Legislation Scrutiny Committee](https://committees.parliament.uk/committee/255/secondary-legislation-scrutiny-committee/). They had been saying that an instrument not being drawn to the special attention of the House precluded the inverse and precluded it being noted as an instrument of interest. And that being noted as an instrument of interest precluded it being drawn to special attention. But the committee can always sit back down, reconsider the instrument and push their verdict upwards. So preclusions from lower levels of reporting to higher levels of reporting have now been removed.

Michael spent a large part of Wednesday reversing the colours of the blobs on the [procedure maps](https://ukparliament.github.io/ontologies/procedure/procedure-ontology.html#flowcharts). For reasons lost in the mists, steps that ould only happen once were coloured white. And steps that could happen multiple times - whether in series or in parallel - were coloured red. This was clearly the wrong way round. And not even side-steppable with Michael's usual whine of, "I'm colour blind." So now self-precluding steps are red and non-self-precluding steps are white. Which might confuse us in the short-term but hopefully makes more sense to those less familiar. This was always a thing Michael wanted to get round to and in no way makework because he was bored stiff and trying to avoid the news.

In the course of writing the procedure map guidelines, Michael set out to look for examples of where preclusions were happening outside of any - implied - symmetry. And found quite a few places where we'd broken our own rules. So another call on Thursday saw Jayne and Michael dive back into procedure maps and data and [delete preclusion routes](https://trello.com/c/wlFrjqjZ/96-approval-motion-withdrawn-shouldnt-preclude-question-on-motion-to-approve) where steps that can happen multiple times were precluding consequential singular steps. Which is probably easier to mime than to type.

